Hello everyone in this lesson we will learn about two settings permalink and pagination.
So naturally Two questions come to mind.
What in the world is a permalink and what is pagination.
We are going to answer both of those questions.
And right now let's begin with permalink x.
Ok so here's the home page of my website and to find navigate to the travel archive page and then click
on the trip to the Midwest post.
I'm taken to the detail screen for just this one single post and most importantly if we look up in the
U R L bar the address bar.
This is the permalink or permanent link for this blog post.
The idea is that this link will not change.
So even if we changed the title of this blog post to my unbelievably amazing summer trip to the Midwest
even if the title changed to you RL should stay the same so it would still be the root of our RL.
And then the year that this post was created and then the month and then the date and then the original
title or slug.
We want this you Arel to be permanent and set in stone because as search engines start indexing our
Web site and as we start sharing links to our posts either via social media or email we want those links
to work.
Even years into the future because nothing is worse than a 4 0 4 error screen.
So let me show you an example.
So if we link someone to an incorrect view RL.
So if I just type a bunch of jibberish here and push enter.
Obviously WordPress has no idea which post I'm referring to here.
So we see.
Oops that page can't be found.
OK.
And the idea is that if our links are permanent hence the name Permalink.
If they don't change over time we don't need to worry about that page not found screen.
Now you might be thinking that permalink sound really simple and you might wonder why I even bother
to bring them up.
Well what I want to show you now is that WordPress gives us the flexibility to change our permalink
structure.
So for example maybe we don't want to include the year in the month and the date.
Maybe instead we just want the root of our domain and then the title of the post.
Or maybe we just want the root of our domain and then a year and then the post.
So maybe we want to leave out the month in the day.
You get the idea.
There are countless different possibilities of how we could structure our permalink you ourselves.
Let me show you what I mean.
So if I jump into my admin dashboard and in the left hand side bar hover over the settings option towards
the bottom and within this menu look for permalink X OK now from this screen we can choose between a
few different settings by default WordPress chooses the day and name option and that's the structure
that uses the year and then the month and then the day and finally the name or title of the post.
But instead of that default option we could use montha name so that includes the year in the month but
leaves out the day.
Or we can use my favorite option which is post name so you can see that that doesn't use the date at
all.
It's simply the root domain and then the title of the post.
So if I click this post name and then scroll down to the bottom and click save changes we see this success
message permalink structure updated.
And now if I jump over to the front facing portion of my website and click on travel.
Now when I click on trip to the Midwest take a look at the permalink.
I like this option because this is fairly easy to type or remember but is totally just personal preference.
So feel free to choose whichever permalink structure you like the best.
However I do want to stress that you should really stick with one permalink structure.
So don't go around constantly changing your permalink options.
Right because the entire idea of a permalink is that it is a permanent link.
It shouldn't change over time.
So when your web site is still relatively new and you don't have tons of content yet and you haven't
really been sharing the post you are Elle's on social media yet and maybe the big search engines like
Google haven't really had enough time to index your site yet.
In the beginning it's ok to experiment with the different permalink options that we see here.
But once your Web site has been around for a while I don't recommend changing the settings.
Also it's worth mentioning that if you have an idea for a permalink structure and you don't see it here.
Right so for example maybe you want the root of your domain and then just the year but not the month
or day and then the title of the post.
Well we don't see that as an option here.
So that's where this final option named custom structure can come into play.
So for example you will notice that as I click on these different options this area right here changes
each time.
And what that's doing is it's showing us the code that WordPress uses to represent these example structures.
So for example when I click on day and name here's the code that represents that.
But we can customize that no problem.
So if I just want the year and then the title or the Post name let's just delete month name and day.
OK and then let's scroll down and click save changes and now if I jump back to my Web site and refresh
the category travel page and click on trip to the Midwest again.
Perfect.
The U R L is simply my domain and then the year and then the title.
So the idea is that you can really fine tune whatever structure you want within this custom structure
field.
All right so at this point we understand what a permalink is and how to customize or permalink structure.
Now let's change gears and let's talk about pagination.
So first we need to ask ourselves what is pagination.
Let's begin by looking at an example of pagination in action from my home page if I click on the recipe's
link behind the scenes before this lesson.
I created a bunch of new recipe posts so dried apple chips orange scones banana waffles blueberry cinnamon
you get the idea.
And if I keep scrolling down after we scrolled by 10 a blog posts now down here we have the option to
go to the second page of posts so this screen that we're on right now showed us the 10 most recent recipe
posts and if we want to see the older posts we need to click on to page two.
OK.
And that concept of only showing a certain amount of posts per page instead of just showing all posts
on a single screen that's referred to as pagination we are splitting up the results into multiple pages
so each page shows 10 posts.
So right now I'm on page two of the recipe's archive and if I scroll down to the bottom I can click
to go back to page 1 OK.
Now by default WordPress will include 10 posts per page but we can customize the way pagination works.
So instead of 10 what if we want there to be only 3 posts per page and then users would need to click
to go to the next page to see the next three.
Well that's super easy to set up.
So if we just jumped to our admin dashboard and look in the sidebar under the settings option within
this menu look for reading and on this reading settings screen we're looking for this blog pages show
at most field by default.
It's set to 10 but we can just change this to three or any other number that we'd like.
And then click Save changes and now let's jump back to our front facing web site and click on recipe's
again.
So now we see dried apple chips orange scones banana waffles and then we have to go to the next page
to see the next three.
So Page 2 includes blueberry cinnamon scones Berry medley fed a chicken salad.
We want the next three we have to go to page three.
You get the idea.
So this is totally personal preference.
It's completely up to you how many posts per page you want to use.
And I encourage you to experiment with different values on this reading setting screen and that's actually
going to bring this lesson to a close.
Let's keep things rolling.
And I will see you in the next lesson.